---
title: "Childhood Crazy Tech Stuff"
date: 2020-05-24T20:49:03+05:30
---

I don't remember much now, but I'm gonna try to recall as much as possible. So, I was young, I don't remember at what age this happened. Surely some age after I was 11 or 12 as that's what I got my new computer and Internet. And I think at that time Orkut was pretty famous. So a bit later than that when Facebook was famous in India. So, I saw something about a different theme for Facebook. It looked call. I think I saw it in some blog post somewhere? Can't remember. But I do remember copying some JavaScript that they gave and said that - that would change the theme for my Facebook if I just copy pasted the Js code in my console. That was the most stupidest thing to do. And I did it. It changed my Facebook to a different theme of course. I think it was red and black or something? And that's it. It looked different and a bit cool :p later, I realized that I tagged a lot of people, I think my friends, in a lot of posts that I hadn't even seen. These were only some random posts. I was not sure how that happened. I do remember suspecting the Js code I think. Now that I think about it, I guess it was very very stupid of me to run someone else's Js code in a webapp in my computer. They could have done a lot of damage, given it's literally remote code execution but the executor was me 🤦‍♂️ 

Later I learned a bit about hacking, sessions, cookies etc. I was even trying to learn how one would hack a Facebook account, if that's possible. This was in college. I realised that Facebook was quite secure, and was refreshing tokens / sessions and I remember that it was getting tough to understand what they were doing :p but I did find and learn some fascinating stuff ;) I remember using some cookies related browser extension to mess with the cookies. I wonder what would have happened if that was malware 🙈🤣😂 Hmm. :P
