---
title: "Trying to Make My Life Easier While Coding"
date: 2020-03-08T09:22:37+05:30
---

Disclaimer: These are just my thoughts. Or rants. :P

Every day I code. I face problems. Usually I get immersed in the problem. These days I try to be lazy. I
try. I think of how to go past the problem, get rid of it, not face it in the future, make my life easier. 

I also don't like to sit idle, waiting for my tests and build. I have a macbook pro 2017 version and even
that's not enough sometimes ðŸ™ˆ we really need to work on better software folks. Something that takes less
memory (RAM), less CPU, overall less resources. Speed is needed yes, but not by killing our machines ðŸ™ˆðŸ˜‚ I
usually run Alacrity, Firefox, Visual Studio Code / IntelliJ, Sublime Text. Nothing more. I don't open all
of em at all times. But usually, that's the max I open. Very rarely Chrome too.

Recently I was running "make build" in my golang repository and it just made my laptop fan just spin like
crazy. I was joking to my team mate how it would kill my laptop if I was running a build on a rust
repository

From that time, I have closed almost all those dead tabs in my Firefox which I always kept saying I'll read
but never did ðŸ˜‚

I really need to start checking how to reduce the whole craziness about my fan speeding up. That's when I
usually check what's going on. Activity monitor, energy icon. I need to install htop and learn about it ðŸ˜‚
and learn about top too

Oh yeah, I forgot a few more apps that I run. Docker!! Unimaginable software. I already get so big docker
images which take up lot of space ðŸ™ˆ and then later I found out that it takes up quite some resources ðŸ”¥
and then Postgres app. I'm not sure if it takes lots of resources. But I run very simple queries and don't
have so much data, so I think I'm good :)

I also don't like waiting for my CI/CD pipeline. A lot of my team mates just do it in their local machine.
Now, there's two sides to it. If you are doing development and testing, doing it from local during that
phase is fine. But if you are sure it will work and just deployment is left out, I would opt for CD
pipeline and jolly well click a button or two and finish it off. I could do it in my local. But why. Also,
the pipeline exists for a reason. If it's not working or not used, why even put it there? May be I'll go
read more upon CI/CD pipelines and come back. Even I don't know too much. But for me, doing it from local
looked error prone and I had to do some extra stuff for the setup. But pipeline is cool. It just works. I'm
lazy and I like it. It makes me push myself to be more productive and get work done soon and go home and go
do something else

I would recommend everyone to start being a bit lazy and more productive. Spend less time. Give yourself a
bit less time, make it scarce and see how you use it ;) 

I usually think of doing some investments - for the better future. Write some automation to make things
faster. Write tools to speed yourself up, to speed up whatever your build is running. Use your cache, but
wisely! ;) Try to see how you can fail fast. When you have a bug, Write tests for your bugs. Make your error
messages easier to read and understand. Make your tests fail in a good manner so that the failure can be 
understood. Whatever that makes your life easier. Just don't accept things as they are when they are 
annoying you :) If you can do something about it, at least have a thought about it. May be when you have 
time, you could act on it to make your life easier :)
